KEP-5328: Node Capability Aware Scheduling (#5347)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5328-node-capabilities/README.md

3. Incorrect configurations can lead to scheduling failures or suboptimal placements.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces a new field `NodeCapabilities `to` NodeSpec.NodeStatus `to expose information which the kube-scheduler and/or the admission controller would use to make more informed decisions.` `Kubelet is primarily responsible for discovering, consolidating, and reporting `NodeCapabilities` to the API server. The data exposed as NodeCapabilities falls into these categories:

1. **Kubelet Configuration:** Includes relevant kubelet feature gates and configurations. A single logical capability can represent multiple underlying settings.
2. **Runtime Configurations:** Covers scheduler-relevant runtime details like supported handlers and features, obtained via the existing [Status RPC](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/79a12c13b6e0a0e049d166d72b0f352057d9e41b/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L117) between Kubelet and CRI.
3. **Kernel Configurations:** Details kernel support necessary for certain pod features, which may be optional or available only in newer kernel versions.

**NodeCapabilities Requirements:**

> 1. Should be derived from static configuration.

Reviewer: should be derived from static configuration, or must be derived from static configuration?

If the former, what are the exceptions?

Author: This is a strict requirement. Changing this to "must".

   csi.kubernetes.io/my-driver/feature/encryptionSupport: "true"
```

**Note:**  

*   We currently have[ Node Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6279) and[ Node Runtime Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6251) which publish some runtime features through Node Status. They are too narrowly scoped and currently not used for scheduling pods. We can deprecate those fields and introduce them into NodeCapabilities if required. 
*   Other API options are explored in the [Alternatives](?tab=t.0#heading=h.vfsx3j6ygclj) section. \

### Kube-Scheduler Changes

To enable the scheduler to filter nodes based on advertised capabilities, this KEP proposes the introduction of a new [Filter Plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/#filter) - `NodeCapabilityFilter`. This plugin will be part of the default scheduler and will be enabled when the `NodeCapabilities` feature gate is active. Additionally, the filter plugin would skip any capability checks for daemonset pods.

`NodeCapabilityFilter` plugin would 

> *   Inspect the PodSpec to infer a set of required NodeCapability key-value pairs.

Reviewer 2: this inference is confusing to me. How will the scheduler know which features in a pod map to one on a node? is it going to be declarative within kubernetes, or imperative?

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade

Users can enable the Node Capabilities feature gate after upgrading to a Kubernetes version that supports it. For the feature to be fully effective, both the control plane and Kubelets must be upgraded to this version. Existing workload should not after the upgrade. The [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy) section details behavior when only the control plane is upgraded while nodes are still running older Kubelet versions without the feature.

#### Downgrade

Downgrading both kubelet and control plane components to a version without the Node Capabilities feature means subsequent scheduling decisions and API request validations will no longer utilize these capabilities. The [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy) section details behavior when only the kubelet is downgraded to a version lacking the feature.

### Version Skew Strategy

The control plane (kube-scheduler) can be on a higher version and looks for specific capability which is not yet enabled on the node. \
 \
Scenario 1: Node Capabilities feature enabled in kube-scheduler (v1.X and feature gate ON), not enabled in kubelet  (v1.X-1 or feature gate OFF). 

> *   This would be a problem only if we need to start reporting existing features through the capability mechanism. We either need to backfill the capability on older versions or the kube-scheduler change would need a fallback mechanism to infer these required capabilities from legacy signals on non-reporting nodes. This backfilling requirement can be a separate feature gate.

Reviewer: > This would be a problem only if we need to start reporting existing features through the capability mechanism.

IIUC, the problem is that the scheduler would be looking for certain node capabilities, but the older version of kubelet is not yet exposing the node capabilities in the node status?

If I understand that right, is this really only a problem for existing features? Say the Node Capabilities feature is enabled in both the scheduler and the kubelet, but there is a new feature that wants to leverage Node Capabilities. If the new feature is enabled in the scheduler, but disabled in the kubelet, wouldn't we run into the same problem specifically with the new feature?

Also related, I see that you are listing a couple of options here for how existing features can handle version skew, but you don't seem to make a particular recommendation either way. Is it your intention for each feature to make its own decision about how to handle version skew for node capabilities or would there be a standard across all of them?

Author: > IIUC, the problem is that the scheduler would be looking for certain node capabilities, but the older version of kubelet is not yet exposing the node capabilities in the node status?

That is correct.

> Say the Node Capabilities feature is enabled in both the scheduler and the kubelet, but there is a new feature that wants to leverage Node Capabilities. If the new feature is enabled in the scheduler, but disabled in the kubelet, wouldn't we run into the same problem specifically with the new feature?.

In this case, a pod thats needs a the new feature is rightly prevented from being scheduled ?. This is covered in Scenario 2. 

> I see that you are listing a couple of options here for how existing features can handle version skew, but you don't seem to make a particular recommendation either way. Is it your intention for each feature to make its own decision about how to handle version skew for node capabilities or would there be a standard across all of them?

Thanks. I've updated the section to provide more clarity. The fallback mechanisms were relevant for hardware resources which was in-scope in the earlier versions of this KEP. For Kubelet, Kernel, and Runtime capabilities, it's unlikely the Control Plane could reliably infer these from older, non-reporting nodes.

[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP proposes a new framework for Kubernetes nodes to inform the kube-scheduler about the capabilities and features supported on the node to aid with better scheduling decisions. This is called "**Node Capabilities**" and could include scheduler relevant information about Kubelet, Kernel and Runtime configurations etc that the Node possesses. The kube-scheduler would understand the workloads requirement for these node capabilities from the pod spec and schedule it on a node that meets their requirements. The intent of this is to prevent scheduling pods on nodes where they cannot run and also reduce the need for manual configuration via taints, tolerations, and node labels for these common scenarios.

## Motivation

This proposal includes **"Node Capabilities"** as scheduling mechanism in Kubernetes ensuring pods can run on nodes reliably on Nodes where they are scheduled while reducing the operational burden. It provides a standardized way for Kubelet to advertise specific node features and configurations, decreasing reliance on manual taints and labels for scheduling decisions.

> NodeCapabilities aims to prevent pods from being scheduled on incompatible nodes - those missing necessary features because of version skew between control plane and the Node or unsupported runtime/kernel configurations ([slack discussion](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C5P3FE08M/p1741867194258139)). Making the scheduler aware of specific node capabilities will enable more reliable pod placement and ensure that incompatibilities are proactively identified as scheduling failures.

Reviewer 3: Shall it prevent pods from being scheduled or bound? We plan to separate workload scheduling from binding and scheduling may start considering non-existing pods yet, and so, not ready Nodes as well.

/cc @wojtek-t @x13n WDYT?

Reviewer 3: IIUC some capabilities are, the ones that signify presence of necessary deamons. Newly turnup nodes would always start with such "missing" capabilities, but it would be temporary which should at least block binding.

### Goals

1. Define a standard mechanism for Nodes to expose Kubelet, Runtime, and Kernel configurations that are pertinent to workload scheduling and/or improve API Request validation. 

> 2. Enhance the kube-scheduler to understand pod requirements and match them against Node capabilities and place pods on compatible nodes. 

Reviewer 3: Can you give some examples in User stories how pod requirement may map to specific capabilities?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. Added some examples.

3. Enable API validation mechanisms to utilize Node Capabilities to verify support for requested operations (e.g., in-place resize, ephemeral containers) before they are processed.

### Non-Goals

1. Replace taints/tolerations or node labels to aid with the scheduling decisions.

> 2. This KEP focuses on introducing the NodeCapabilities API. The exact details of how specific Node Capabilities should be mapped to workload requirements is use case specific and out of scope for this KEP. 

Author: I added some details on the kube-scheduler changes necessary and included example workflows in the Design section. PTAL.

> 2. This KEP focuses on introducing the NodeCapabilities API. The exact details of how specific Node Capabilities should be mapped to workload requirements is use case specific and out of scope for this KEP. 

Reviewer 4: For backwards compatibility, I think this is largely forward-facing for new features (although we might be able to backfill some features once the capabilities are reported by all nodes in the version skew range).

## Existing Mechanisms and Limitations

The Kubernetes scheduler currently uses two primary mechanisms to control pod placement onto specific nodes:

1. Taints and Tolerations 

    Primarily used to **restrict** which pods can schedule onto specific nodes commonly to manage specialized hardware resources. 

    **Standard usage pattern:**
*   Cluster Administrators apply Taints to nodes equipped with special capabilities; cloud providers may also automate this tainting for certain NodePool configurations.
*   Developers add corresponding Tolerations in their Pod specifications for workloads to be able to run on these nodes. Alternatively, Cluster Administrator or Cloud Provider could also inject tolerations through admission webhooks. 

2. Node Labels and Node Selectors/Affinity

    Primarily used to **attract** specific nodes for pods based on the node's characteristics. By applying specific labels to nodes (reflecting Kubelet features, OS version, etc.), we can enable pods to use selectors or affinity to ensure they run on specific nodes.

    **Standard usage pattern:**

> *   Cluster Administrators apply specific Labels to nodes to indicate the presence of certain features. This involves applying descriptive labels (Eg:_ kubelet.config.k8s.io/some-alpha-feature=enabled_, _node.kubernetes.io/gvisor-enabled=true_)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   Cluster Administrators apply specific Labels to nodes to indicate the presence of certain features. This involves applying descriptive labels (Eg: `kubelet.config.k8s.io/some-alpha-feature=enabled`, `node.kubernetes.io/gvisor-enabled=true`)
```

> *   Optionally for well defined features like[ RunTimeClass](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/runtime-class/), administrators may create abstractions (RuntimeClass Object) that bundle these feature requirements with a node selector targeting the corresponding node labels (Eg: spec._nodeSelector: { "node.kubernetes.io/runtime.gvisor": "true" })_

Reviewer 4: nit: cleanup formatting
```suggestion
*   Optionally for well defined features like[ RunTimeClass](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/runtime-class/), administrators may create abstractions (RuntimeClass Object) that bundle these feature requirements with a node selector targeting the corresponding node labels (Eg: `spec.nodeSelector: { "node.kubernetes.io/runtime.gvisor": "true" }`)
```

3. Incorrect configurations can lead to scheduling failures or suboptimal placements.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces a new field `NodeCapabilities `to` NodeSpec.NodeStatus `to expose information which the kube-scheduler and/or the admission controller would use to make more informed decisions.` `Kubelet is primarily responsible for discovering, consolidating, and reporting `NodeCapabilities` to the API server. The data exposed as NodeCapabilities falls into these categories:

1. **Kubelet Configuration:** Includes relevant kubelet feature gates and configurations. A single logical capability can represent multiple underlying settings.
2. **Runtime Configurations:** Covers scheduler-relevant runtime details like supported handlers and features, obtained via the existing [Status RPC](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/79a12c13b6e0a0e049d166d72b0f352057d9e41b/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L117) between Kubelet and CRI.
3. **Kernel Configurations:** Details kernel support necessary for certain pod features, which may be optional or available only in newer kernel versions.

**NodeCapabilities Requirements:**

> 1. Must be derived from static configuration.

Reviewer 4: This rules out any capabilities derived from plugins that can be registered after startup. That seems OK for an MVP, but are we open to relaxing this requirement in the future?

Reviewer 4: > The key challenge would be to ensure that the capabilities are published before the workload pods are scheduled.

I don't think that would be a problem with the way capabilities are currently defined? In other words, the only way the scheduler uses capabilities is by saying that a certain capability is required. If plugin capabilities are strictly additive, it just means that workloads that require those plugin capabilities wouldn't be able to be scheduled before they're added.

Author: Thanks. Makes sense. Temporary scheduling delay should be fine and even safe. The proposed API (node.status.capabilities) itself should be broad enough to handle plugin-derived capabilities. I'll update the KEP to include this as a goal for Beta, along with the necessary considerations.

> 2. Do not indicate operational health or Node readiness.[ Node Readiness Gates](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11i2_rewvcbQkFFq1BIwHa7lgIefgZ8Mak-QMZjP7fFs/edit?tab=t.0)<span style="text-decoration:underline;"> </span>are better suited for such dynamic readiness signals.

Reviewer 4: nit: delete the span
```suggestion
2. Do not indicate operational health or Node readiness.[ Node Readiness Gates](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11i2_rewvcbQkFFq1BIwHa7lgIefgZ8Mak-QMZjP7fFs/edit?tab=t.0) are better suited for such dynamic readiness signals.
```

**Examples**: 

*   Alpha features like[ PodLevelResources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-pod-level-resources/) which may be enabled on selected Node Pools for evaluation. Instead of Node labels and selectors, the kube-scheduler can use` pod.spec.resources` to map pods needing the feature to Nodes advertising the capability
*   Beta features like[ InPlacePodResizing](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/resize-container-resources/) may be enabled in the Control Plane but not on all the Nodes due to version skew. There currently exists a[ workaround](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/23258f104d74c6f27fd4db94940d745d9d463a8f/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L5796) to handle this version skew by looking for alternate signals from the pod spec. But having such workarounds may not always be possible. Alternatively, we could use` pod.spec.nodeName` and validate if the Node has the required capability.

### Story 2

> Prevent Pods from being scheduled on Nodes lacking their required Kubelet, Kernel, or Runtime features, avoiding errors, degraded performance, or silent failures.

Reviewer 4: Some features depend on both a feature gate and configuration. For example, swap depends on:
1. Feature gate enabled
2. Kubelet configuration (`memorySwapBehavior`)
3. Kernel configuration (swap controller available & cgroups v2)

Would this be exposed as several capabilities, or would we collapse all 3 to a single capability representing whether swap is supported?

*  [PodLevelResources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-pod-level-resources/) is currently not supported on Windows Nodes. The capability advertised by kubelet can be dependent on both the feature gate and the operating system which the kube-scheduler can filter out all Windows Nodes.
*   When pods request for a specific [RunTimeClass](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/runtime-class/) (`spec.runtimeClassName`), we currently use node selectors to make sure they are on appropriate nodes . Instead, kube-scheduler can automatically identify nodes that possess the corresponding capability.

## Design Details

### API Changes

 \
Add a field `NodeCapabilities` field as type `map[string]string `to the` NodeSpec.NodeStatus` structure. 

```
type NodeStatus struct {
    // ... existing fields
    // NodeCapabilities provides a structured way to report various capabilities of the node. Keys are typically DNS-style and values are strings.
    // +optional 
    // +featureGate=NodeCapabilities

>     NodeCapabilities map[string]string `json:"capabilities,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Is `Node` redundant in the field name here?

}

// Node object remains unchanged in spec, only status is modified.
type Node struct {
    ...
    Status NodeStatus `json:"status,omitempty" `
}

```

**Example:**

```

> NodeCapabilities:

Reviewer 5: So this is pretty much the same thing as labels, except:
- node capabilities are immutable
- they are derived automatically by kubelet instead of being a part of kubelet config

Is my understanding correct?

If so, how can infrastructure autoscaling predict what node capabilities will be available on a node once it is created? Will this require dedicated implementation for each capability?

Reviewer 4: Yes, these are basically just implicit labels & label selectors.

Good question about autoscaling. When we were discussing the criteria for what goes in to capabilities, I proposed the heuristic requirement that all nodes in a NodePool should have the same set of capabilities. We don't actually have an common concept of NodePool in Kubernetes, but I think that should get the intent across. If that is the case, could the autoscaler look at a sample instance in the same pool and assume that scaling nodes with the same template will produce the same set of capabilities?

Reviewer 6: > If that is the case, could the autoscaler look at a sample instance in the same pool and assume that scaling nodes with the same template will produce the same set of capabilities?

That works if such a node exists. In case of NodeAutoProvisioning and creating new node-pool, this won't work...

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure we have any good options here. Would definitely like to hear suggestions. What I can think of:

1. Require an "archetype" instance, basically what I suggested in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5347#discussion_r2133072894. This prevents scale-to-zero node pools, but as long as an instance is initially created, the NAP can save a snapshot.
2. Define capabilities statically based on the node template. This would require replicating Kubelet admission logic, and knowing the {version, config}->capability mapping for the key components (kernel, runtime).

I don't really think (2) is viable.

Author: Thanks all. I captured the above discussion in the "Future Considerations/Cluster Autoscaler Integration" section in the KEP.

cc @SergeyKanzhelev

   // Kubelet configurations
   kubernetes.io/feature/podLevelResources: "true"
   kubernetes.io/feature/inPlacePodResize: "true"
   // Runtime configurations 
   runtime.kubernetes.io/handlers: "runc, runsc"
   // Kernel capabilities
   kernel.kubernetes.io/LSMConfig: "seLinux"   
   // Plugins capabilities
   csi.kubernetes.io/my-driver/feature/encryptionSupport: "true"
```

**Note:**  

*   We currently have[ Node Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6279) and[ Node Runtime Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6251) which publish some runtime features through Node Status. They are too narrowly scoped and currently not used for scheduling pods. We can deprecate those fields and introduce them into NodeCapabilities if required. 

> *   Other API options are explored in the [Alternatives](?tab=t.0#heading=h.vfsx3j6ygclj) section. \

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   Other API options are explored in the [Alternatives](#alternatives) section.
```

*   Inspect the PodSpec to infer a set of required NodeCapability key-value pairs. This inference is performed using imperative logic built into the scheduler plugin (without new, explicit capability request fields in the PodSpec).
*   For each node being evaluated, the plugin will access the `node.status.capabilities` map. It will then iterate through the pod's inferred requirements and check if each required capability is present and matches on the node. If any inferred requirement is not met, the plugin will filter the node, making it unschedulable for the pod.
*   On a mismatch, the plugin will return an FailedScheduling status with a reason that includes the capability that was not found on Nodes.

### Admission Controller Changes

To enable the validation of API requests against Node Capabilities, this KEP proposes the introduction of a new admission controller plugin `NodeCapabilityValidator `that will be enabled when the NodeCapabilities feature gate is active. This is necessary because the validation logic that requires cross-referencing objects i,e looking up the `Node` object that a `Pod` is bound to (spec.nodeName). THe admission controller would 

> *   Inspects incoming pod update request and infer if it depends on any node capability. 

Reviewer 4: We should wait for a concrete use case before adding this. In-place pod resize would have used this, but the timelines don't line up.

Also note that several of the features that could have used this have a separate subresource (`resize` & `ephemeralContainers`)

Author: In-place resizing for Guaranteed QoS pods with static CPU policy is an WIP feature that highlights the need for Node Capabilities in admission control. Added more details in the "Example Walkthrough" section.

*   It verifies that `pod.spec.nodeName` is set. If the pod is not yet bound to a node, the validator takes no action.
*   Retrieve the `Node` object corresponding to` pod.spec.nodeName` and check the node.Status.capabilities map of the fetched Node object.
*   If the capability is missing or has a non-matching value, the request is marked as invalid

### Example Walkthrough

**New Features and Version Skew Management**

1. When developing a new Kubelet feature Eg:[ In-Place Pod Resize for Guaranteed QoS pods](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5294), the skew management strategy involves

>     *   Modifying the Kubelet to advertise the feature as a Node Capability if the feature gate `InPlacePodVerticalScalingExclusiveCPUs` is active. Kubelet would add <code>[kubernetes.io/feature/inPlacePodResizeExclusiveCpus](http://kubernetes.io/feature/inPlacePodResizeExclusiveCpus): true </code>in<code> status.capabilities</code>.

Reviewer 4: This is another example of a feature that depends on both Kubelet configuration & feature gate. Would kubelet publish both the feature gate capability, and the CPU policy as a capability?

    *   Updating the <code>NodeCapabilityValidator</code> to check if the node specified in the pod's <code>spec.nodeName</code> possesses this capability before the request is admitted.
2. An Admin enables the <code>InPlacePodVerticalScalingExclusiveCPUs</code> alpha feature gate on a NodePool. 
3. The Kubelet on the Node detects this and advertises its support by setting <code>[kubernetes.io/feature/inPlacePodResizeExclusiveCpus](http://kubernetes.io/feature/inPlacePodResizeExclusiveCpus): true </code>in<code> status.capabilities</code>.<code> </code>
4. An Application Owner has a Guaranteed QoS Pod running on the Node and requests an in place resize. 
5. When the API server processes the resize request, its validation logic for pod updates is invoked in the admission controller. The request is admitted only if the Node supports the feature. \

**Workload Requirements during Scheduling**

> 1. The feature developer will enhance the Kubelet to conditionally advertise capabilities for `PodLevelResources`. Kubelet will check that both the feature gate is enabled and the underlying OS is Linux before adding the `kubernetes.io/feature/PodLevelResources: "true"` capability to the node's status.

Reviewer 4: If a beta feature is explicitly disabled, would you expect it to omit the capability, or publish `kubernetes.io/feature/PodLevelResources: "false"`? I'm not sure it matters in practice, but probably omitting the feature is better, so there's consistency between a node that doesn't know about the feature and one that has it disabled.

> 1. The feature developer will enhance the Kubelet to conditionally advertise capabilities for `PodLevelResources`. Kubelet will check that both the feature gate is enabled and the underlying OS is Linux before adding the `kubernetes.io/feature/PodLevelResources: "true"` capability to the node's status.

Reviewer 4: > will check that both the feature gate is enabled and the underlying OS is Linux

Yet another example of combining feature gate with other conditions. I think combining them is probably the right approach, but maybe the capability name should be something different if it's not strictly just reporting the feature gate status?

2. An Application Owner deploys a Pod that requires pod-level resource management by defining resources directly in the pod spec (e.g., `spec.resources.requests`).
3. The `NodeCapabilityFilter` in kube-scheduler inspects the `PodSpec`. Upon detecting the `spec.resources` field, it infers that the pod requires the `PodLevelResources` capability. The filter automatically rejects all Windows nodes that do not advertise this capability, ensuring the pod is only placed on a compatible Linux nodes.

### Changes on Existing Nodes

> Node capabilities should generally represent mostly stable foundational configurations of the Node, not frequently changing real-time statuses (Example: Driver health). Node capabilities are primarily assessed by the kube-scheduler during pod scheduling. Post-scheduling, the Node Capability changes (e.g., kubelet restart with configuration or feature gate changes) is intended to not have any impact on the running pods on the Node and should only be relevant for new workload. 

Reviewer 4: > kubelet restart with configuration or feature gate changes

I think the recommendation would be to drain the node before changing the configuration. I think it's safe to assume that doing so without draining the node could have unintended consequences.

3. Incorrect configurations can lead to scheduling failures or suboptimal placements.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces a new field `Capabilities `to` NodeSpec.NodeStatus `to expose information which the kube-scheduler and/or the admission controller would use to make more informed decisions.` `Kubelet is primarily responsible for discovering, consolidating, and reporting `Capabilities` to the API server. The data exposed as Capabilities falls into these categories:

1. **Kubelet Configuration:** Includes relevant kubelet feature gates and configurations. A single logical capability can represent multiple underlying settings.
2. **Runtime Configurations:** Covers scheduler-relevant runtime details like supported handlers and features, obtained via the existing [Status RPC](https://github.com/kubernetes/cri-api/blob/79a12c13b6e0a0e049d166d72b0f352057d9e41b/pkg/apis/runtime/v1/api.proto#L117) between Kubelet and CRI.
3. **Kernel Configurations:** Details kernel support necessary for certain pod features, which may be optional or available only in newer kernel versions.

**Node Capabilities Requirements:**

> 1. Must be derived from static configuration.

Reviewer 2: yeah should we make a blanket statement that a node reboot is required to update node.Status?

2. Do not indicate operational health or Node readiness.[Node Readiness Gates](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5233) are better suited for such dynamic readiness signals.

> 3. Usable during scheduling or API request validation to:

Reviewer 7: Can you make it very explicit in the KEP text?

    *   Filter nodes in Kube-Scheduler by matching a pod's needs (from its spec) to Node Capabilities.

>     *   Or, Infer from API requests (Eg: in-place resize or ephemeral containers) at the validation stage.

Reviewer 7: @tallclair is this your understanding as well? So every release we will add more capabilities for each new thing kubelet supports? And the assumption will be that those capabilities will exist for KEP GA+3 versions when we can assume that the feature is working?

## User Stories 

### Story 1

> Effectively manage version skew during new feature introductions, and enable faster feedback loops with safer rollouts for Kubelet/Runtime features by scheduling Pods to nodes possessing these specific capabilities, especially in mixed-version clusters.

Reviewer 2: I am almost tempted to go further and say the scheduler should only be taught about features that are associated with a feature gate. I find it weird we'll be encoding knowledge about how different pod spec fields relate to static properties on the node. If the kubelet declared a relationship between a feature gate and whether the state of the node can allow for that feature gate to be used, then the capability is less hardcoded. for instance, the oci runtime ability idmapped mounts mapping to user namespaces isn't immediately clear out of development. If a user wants to see whether their pod using a new feature would be able to run on a node, I think relating the feature to a feature gate would be most clear. thoughts?

> Effectively manage version skew during new feature introductions, and enable faster feedback loops with safer rollouts for Kubelet/Runtime features by scheduling Pods to nodes possessing these specific capabilities, especially in mixed-version clusters.

Reviewer 2: ah I should have read before commenting, that's what this is doing. i think focusing on the feature gate use case to start makes sense.

> **Examples**: 

Reviewer 7: Yes, the semver node selector is a parallel feature. My point is that once we have it, it may cover so many use cases in a straightforward way. For example, a webhook can add the node selector to every pod that requires a specific feature gate on a node. And cluster admin can configure which version this should be depending on nodes config

 \
Add a field `Capabilities` field as type `map[string]string `to the` NodeSpec.NodeStatus` structure. 

```
type NodeStatus struct {
    // ... existing fields
    // Capabilities provides a structured way to report various capabilities of the node. Keys are typically DNS-style and values are strings.
    // +optional 
    // +featureGate=NodeCapabilities
    Capabilities map[string]string `json:"capabilities,omitempty"`
}

// Node object remains unchanged in spec, only status is modified.
type Node struct {
    ...
    Status NodeStatus `json:"status,omitempty" `
}

```

**Example:**

```
Capabilities:
   kubernetes.io/feature/inPlacePodResize: "true"
   kubernetes.io/feature/podLevelResourcesSupport: "true"
   kubernetes.io/feature/swapSupport: "true"
   runtime.kubernetes.io/handlers: "runc, runsc"
   kernel.kubernetes.io/LSMConfig: "seLinux"   
```

**Capability Reporting Semantics**

1. If multiple interdependent settings are required to enable a feature, they must be collapsed into a single, logical capability. This simplifies the decision-making process for control plane components like the scheduler, which should not need to understand multiple interdependent settings. 

> For example, Swap support on a node depends on several conditions: the feature gate, Kubelet configuration, and underlying kernel support. Instead of reporting these three states individually, Kubelet evaluates them and advertises a single, simple capability: kubernetes.io/feature/swapSupport: "true".

Reviewer 8: I'd like to suggest to having the swap capability bring out the 'swap mode' from node configuration to allow future enhancements without the risk of breaking existing plugin.

> For example, Swap support on a node depends on several conditions: the feature gate, Kubelet configuration, and underlying kernel support. Instead of reporting these three states individually, Kubelet evaluates them and advertises a single, simple capability: kubernetes.io/feature/swapSupport: "true".

Reviewer 8: >  Instead of designing the way limited swap can coexist with the explicitly specified swap, we will be taking "easy route" for us, but very challenging for the customer.

@SergeyKanzhelev Thank you for your feedback.

I'd like to clarify the primary requirement for "swap-capability" is for isolating swap workloads to swap-enabled nodes - not for 'co-existing' pods in a LimitedSwap environment. My perspective is that 'clear isolation' is a more common use-case for swap as latency-critical applications will be preferred not to be placed on a node where swap is enabled.  

Discovering swap as a 'capability' is crucial to address the gap in existing 'LimitedSwap' by giving the guardrail for latency-critical workloads in heterogenous nodes. Alternatives like 'NFD' exists for detecting ['swap-enabled' nodes](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery/issues/1584). But it has drawbackcs: it is an OOTB solution and it reports the node's state, not the kubelet's configured state. 

> 'avoid API review and introduce a capability'

To your point about avoiding API review, our intent is the opposite. Solving this placement problem requires two distinct API changes, both needing full review: 
1. A scheduler discoverable signal from the node about its swap status (this KEP).
2. A field in the PodSpec for user to express their preference, either [KEP 5359](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5359) or some other form at pod.

My view is that we should treat swap management as a two-part problem:

1. Problem 1 (Placement): Should this pod run on a swap node at all? (A qualitative question, best solved by this KEP).
2. Problem 2 (Consumption): If co-existing on a swap node, how much swap can it use? (A quantitative question, which could be solved with limiting API (allocatable) in a future enhancement).

I agree we shouldn't overload capabilities, but swap placement feels like a critical and justified capability to include.

> For example, Swap support on a node depends on several conditions: the feature gate, Kubelet configuration, and underlying kernel support. Instead of reporting these three states individually, Kubelet evaluates them and advertises a single, simple capability: kubernetes.io/feature/swapSupport: "true".

Reviewer 7: @ajaysundark I am not sure where to start discussing swap. I cannot come up with the good use of capability to represent swap. For swap aware scheduling, we likely will need more information about swap than just the fact it is enabled. If we use swap as a deterrent for Pods  that want a Node without swap, than we need swap to allow to be a node selector. Or we need a special field on a Pod saying "no-swap-node". Effectively hardcoding the node label, node-selector combination into API. And likely swap aware scheduling will have a different mechanism, making it inconsistent. If we use swap to separate LimitedSwap vs. SwapAware, it is a generally bad API. Effectively in this case we are using capability as a way to "deprecate" the LimitedSwap so we should not solve the problem of migrating customers from limited to aware modes. 

For example, I read the comment above as the suggestion:

- "swapEnabled" capability exposed by the Node
- Pod has a field that can be set to "NoSwap, OkToSwap, PlaceMeToNodeWithoutSwap, RequireSwap". 

I think it is not a great API. We are fitting the node selector into the specific field. Now some scheduling constraints are expressed as nodes and taints, some as hardcoded fields. It is confusing. Also all things like Cluster Autoscaler will need to learn each field like this and how it affects which node to create. Finally, other things like size of swap if likely will need to be expressed via the separate field. Making it to two separate places advertising swap and used for a slightly different purposes.

Anyways, if you believe that swap as a capability will be useful, can you please come up with the end-to-end story for it that will explain the capability is a good fit for swap?

*   Other API options are explored in the [Alternatives](#alternatives) section.

### Kube-Scheduler Changes

To enable the scheduler to filter nodes based on advertised capabilities, this KEP proposes the introduction of a new [Filter Plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/#filter) - `NodeCapabilityFilter`. This plugin will be part of the default scheduler and will be enabled when the `NodeCapabilities` feature gate is active. Additionally, the filter plugin would skip any capability checks for daemonset pods.

`NodeCapabilityFilter` plugin would 

*   Inspect the PodSpec to infer a set of required NodeCapability key-value pairs. This inference is performed using imperative logic built into the scheduler plugin (without new, explicit capability request fields in the PodSpec).
*   For each node being evaluated, the plugin will access the `node.status.capabilities` map. It will then iterate through the pod's inferred requirements and check if each required capability is present and matches on the node. If any inferred requirement is not met, the plugin will filter the node, making it unschedulable for the pod.

> *   On a mismatch, the plugin will return an FailedScheduling status with a reason that includes the capability that was not found on Nodes.

Author: Will rephrase this. What I mean here is, If we do not find any Node with a required capability, the pod would remain in a pending state with a `FailedScheduling` event that explains why.

> *   On a mismatch, the plugin will return an FailedScheduling status with a reason that includes the capability that was not found on Nodes.

Reviewer 7: writing up about this deserves it's own section. Also, will it be "forever" state or the plan is to make capabilities dynamic in future?

    2. Backfill capability information on older versions.
    3. Use a "default-allow" strategy when the capability is absent. This maintains the current kube-scheduler behavior for these pre-existing features. Nodes are filtered out only if the capability is explicitly set to false.

Scenario 2 :  Kube-Scheduler is looking for certain kubelet capability (a new feature added in v1.X) but nodes are running older kubelet versions ( v1.X-2) that do not have the capability.

*   This is a valid use case that Node Capabilities is trying to address. The pod that relies on the feature being enabled should remain pending with a valid status message. 
*   This prevents pods from failing or running with degraded functionality on incompatible nodes, which can happen today if feature-specific node labels and selectors are not properly applied.

### Kubelet Feature Graduation 

For Node Capabilities that report the status of specific feature gates, after a feature graduates to GA, the reporting of that particular feature gate becomes obsolete and can be automatically removed. Kube-scheduler can stop doing the capability check after GA + allowed version skew.

> ### Future Considerations 

Author: Not sure of the details yet. This discussion can be deferred and considered while designing a solution "Explicit Capability Request".

#### [Scoped for Beta] Plugin-Derived Capabilities

> While the initial scope of this KEP is intentionally limited to static capabilities, a key future enhancement is to extend this framework to allow dynamically registered plugins (e.g., device plugins) to advertise their own stable capabilities. This would allow the scheduler to make even more informed decisions based on the full set of features available on a node, including those provided by add-on components.

Author: Thanks. The intent here was still include relatively stable configuration information which the kubelet does not have during bootstrap but learns later (Eg: after the device plugin is registered). I have included some chalenges to do this, but I would love to learn more about potential chalenges that you see on the scheduler side and if there is a way to overcome those.

cc @tallclair

> While the initial scope of this KEP is intentionally limited to static capabilities, a key future enhancement is to extend this framework to allow dynamically registered plugins (e.g., device plugins) to advertise their own stable capabilities. This would allow the scheduler to make even more informed decisions based on the full set of features available on a node, including those provided by add-on components.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I'm fine with removing this section for now. I think the point of putting it here was that it's something we could consider in the future, but this makes it look like it's something we WILL consider in the future. Agree that we need to fully evaluate it when there's a need.

and attempt to answer them.

For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

No. Capabilities are published as part of the existing NodeStatus updates.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No. This feature will not introduce new top-level API types. Instead, it will modify the existing Node API type by adding a new field node.status.capabilities, to convey capability information.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

Yes. The size of the Node object is expected to increase as more capabilities are introduced. The number of capabilities exported will be limited by strategies such as:
1. Automatically handling feature graduation, which includes ceasing to export a capability once it matures or is no longer needed.

> 2. Exporting only configurations that are relevant to the control plane.

Reviewer 2: and how do we know what's relevant to the control plane? features that relate to a pod spec option?

> 2. Exporting only configurations that are relevant to the control plane.

Reviewer 6: friendly ping

> 2. Exporting only configurations that are relevant to the control plane.

Author: Thanks Sergey. Maybe that is fair as an upper estimate. I looked a few recent releases and i see around 25 - 30 kubelet feature gates per release. I did not look into how many off those also had pod Spec changes.

> 2. Exporting only configurations that are relevant to the control plane.

Reviewer 4: I think this would be roughly bounded by the size of the PodSpec API. Not every pod field will require a capability, and there might be some cases where multiple capabilities are used for a single feature (e.g. in-place resize feasibility check use case), but I think PodSpec would be a very generous upper bound. In practice, I expect it will be much less.

   </td>
   <td style="background-color: null"><strong>Disadvantages</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="background-color: null">Introducing a<strong> <code>NodeCapabilities</code></strong> API
   </td>
   <td style="background-color: null"><ul>

<li>Keeps node capabilities information separate from the operational status in <code>NodeStatus.</code>
<li>Updates can be infrequent and only when the capability changes.
<li>Allows for evolving the features API independently. Easier to extend with new feature types and fields.</li></ul>

   </td>
   <td style="background-color: null"><ul>

<li>Increase API server load - Kube-scheduler should start watching the new core API object.
<li>Additional etcd load due to creating, updating, and reading these new objects.
<li>Increased scheduling latency as the kube-scheduler now needs to reconcile additional objects to make scheduling decisions.</li></ul>

   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="background-color: null">Adding well defined NodeLabels in Kubelet
   </td>
   <td style="background-color: null"><ul>

<li>No Core API Change. Leverages an existing and well-established Kubernetes mechanism for attaching metadata.

> <li>Does not need periodic updates.</li></ul>

Reviewer 7: Also allows for node-restricted labels.

*   When pods request for a specific [RunTimeClass](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/runtime-class/) (`spec.runtimeClassName`), we currently use node selectors to make sure they are on appropriate nodes . Instead, kube-scheduler can automatically identify nodes that possess the corresponding capability.

## Design Details

### API Changes

 \
Add a field `Capabilities` field as type `map[string]string` to the `Node.Status` structure. 

```
type NodeStatus struct {
    // ... existing fields
    // Capabilities provides a structured way to report various capabilities of the node. Keys are typically DNS-style and values are strings.
    // +optional 
    // +featureGate=NodeCapabilities
    Capabilities map[string]string `json:"capabilities,omitempty"`
}

// Node object remains unchanged in spec, only status is modified.
type Node struct {
    ...
    Status NodeStatus `json:"status,omitempty" `
}

```

**Example:**

```
Capabilities:
   feature.kubernetes.io/inPlacePodResize: "true"
   feature.kubernetes.io/podLevelResourcesSupport: "true"
   feature.kubernetes.io/swapSupport: "true"
   runtime.kubernetes.io/handlers: "runc, runsc"

>    kernel.kubernetes.io/LSMConfig: "seLinux"   

Reviewer 7: rolling out the LMSConfig as capability will be a big challenge. Even if we ignore the desire to declare this as a node-restricted label in many environments, backfilling this and eventually enforcing with many "incompatible" configuration that might be existing today, will be a challenge

```

**Capability Reporting Semantics**

1. If multiple interdependent settings are required to enable a feature, they must be collapsed into a single, logical capability. This simplifies the decision-making process for control plane components like the scheduler, which should not need to understand multiple interdependent settings. 

> For example, Swap support on a node depends on several conditions: the feature gate, Kubelet configuration, and underlying kernel support. Instead of reporting these three states individually, Kubelet evaluates them and advertises a single, simple capability: kubernetes.io/feature/swapSupport: "true".

Reviewer 7: Is swap support is the real world or theoretical example? How scheduler will use it? No swap KEPs were required swap to be enabled when the pod is being scheduled. If we will have a follow up KEP that requires swap memory for the Pod, I hope it will be designed in a shape where the swap is advirtised in some alternative way, not via the capabilities. Perhaps as allocatable resource or some other ways that are not just a label on the node

> 2. A capability should only be present if `node.status.capabilities` map if the feature is enabled and functional (`true` or another descriptive string if the capability is not boolean). If a feature is disabled (e.g., a beta feature gate is explicitly set to false) or not supported at all (e.g., on an older Kubelet version or an incompatible OS), the Kubelet must omit the corresponding capability key from the map entirely. This ensures there is consistency between a node that doesn't know about the feature and one that has it disabled which simplifies the logic for control plane components.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I'd expect the pod to be stuck in pending in this case, with a helpful message about why (e.g. "requires the XYZ capability, but no nodes support that capability"). This would be an argument for making capabilities human-readable. I suppose we could also add support for custom error messages, but I think this should be out-of-scope for the MVP.

> 3. The keys and values within the `node.status.capabilities` map must adhere to the same validation rules as standard Kubernetes labels. The Kubelet validates each capability and discards any key-value pair that is invalid, logging an error.

Reviewer 7: sorry, I do not understand at which stage kubelet will reject invalid key-value pairs. Are there some plugins planned for it that populate capabilitiues from the external sources? Or kubelet will validate capabilities set by other sources  directly thru API?

**Note:**  

> *   We currently have [Node Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6279) and [Node Runtime Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6251) which publish some runtime features through Node Status. They are too narrowly scoped and currently not used for scheduling pods. We can deprecate those fields and introduce them into NodeCapabilities if required. 

Reviewer 4: I think we should have a follow-up conversation about whether CRI should adopt a similar API for coordinating features with the Kubelet, or continue with the hard-coded features API it currently uses.

This discussion shouldn't block this KEP though.

*   Other API options are explored in the [Alternatives](#alternatives) section.

### kube-scheduler Changes

> To enable capability-based scheduling, this KEP proposes a new scheduler plugin named NodeCapabilityFilter. This plugin will be part of the default scheduling framework and will be enabled when the NodeCapabilities feature gate is active. DaemonSet Pods will be skipped by this plugin.

Reviewer 7: Why deamonsets will be skipped? If we start using capabilities for scheduling a "correct" version of a Pod, I would think that two different DaemonSet may be needed for each LMSConfig?

Author: Ack. Removed.

#### Performance Considerations

Introducing this plugin adds a new step to the scheduling cycle, which may have an impact on scheduling throughput. However, this trade-off is acceptable because it prevents the greater inefficiency of scheduling a pod onto a node where it cannot run.

### Admission Controller Changes

To enable the validation of API requests against Node Capabilities, this KEP proposes the introduction of a new admission controller plugin `NodeCapabilityValidator `that will be enabled when the NodeCapabilities feature gate is active. This is necessary because the validation logic that requires cross-referencing objects i,e looking up the `Node` object that a `Pod` is bound to (spec.nodeName). The admission controller would 

> *   Inspects incoming pod update request and infer if it depends on any node capability. 

Reviewer 2: I'd love if if the admission controller could share code with the scheduler here so infererencing is happening consistently. I'd really love it if they could just see in the API directly that thefeature is enabled with a feature gate, and match against that feature gate, but I don't know if the apiserver encodes that information once it's serialized

Reviewer 4: > There are various components that can mess up the capabilities.

Do you mean by updating the node status? Or do you mean changing node configuration?

> So we need to declare the behavior. If kubelet is the ultimate source of capabilities - it must continuously reconcile it.

Again, do you mean reconcile the node status, or continuously recompute the set of capabilities?

> And must not believe capabilities API server has if kubelet doesn't have them defined.

I don't understand this part. Do you mean the Kubelet needs its own internal source of truth for capabilities, rather than just reading them back from the node object?

*   It verifies that `pod.spec.nodeName` is set. If the pod is not yet bound to a node, the validator takes no action.
*   Retrieve the `Node` object corresponding to` pod.spec.nodeName` and check the `node.status.capabilities` map of the fetched node object.
*   If the capability is missing or has a non-matching value, the request is marked as invalid

### Example Walkthrough

**New Features and Version Skew Management**

1. When developing a new Kubelet feature Eg: [In-Place Pod Resize for Guaranteed QoS pods](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5294), the version skew management strategy involves
    *   Modifying the Kubelet to advertise the feature as a Node Capability `feature.kubernetes.io/guaranteedQOSPodCPUResize`. This capability is advertised in the below conditions
        * `InPlacePodResize` and `InPlacePodVerticalScalingExclusiveCPUs` feature gates are enabled and CPU Manager Policy is set to `static`. 
        * `InPlacePodResize` feature gate is enabled and CPU Manager Policy is `none`.

>     *   Updating the <code>NodeCapabilityValidator</code> to check if the node specified in the pod's <code>spec.nodeName</code> possesses this capability before the resize request is admitted.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    *   Updating the `NodeCapabilityValidator` to check if the node specified in the pod's `spec.nodeName` possesses this capability before the resize request is admitted.
```

just a nit - this is easier to read and syntax-highlighted

2. An Admin enables  <code>InPlacePodVerticalScaling</code> and <code>InPlacePodVerticalScalingExclusiveCPUs</code> feature gates  and `static` CPU Manager Policy on a NodePool. 
3. The Kubelet on the node detects this and advertises its support by setting `feature.kubernetes.io/guaranteedQOSPodCPUResize: true` in `status.capabilities`.
4. An Application Owner has a Guaranteed QoS Pod running on the node and requests an in-place CPU resize. 

> 5. When the API server processes the resize request, its validation logic for pod updates is invoked in the admission controller. The request is admitted only if the node supports the feature.

Reviewer 7: can you add details on when this capability will be removed (if it will be)?

### Version Skew Strategy

Scenario 1: Node Capabilities enabled in the Control Plane (v1.X or feature gate ON), not enabled in kubelet  (v1.X-1 or feature gate OFF). 

*   This presents a challenge when existing features begin to be reported through the new Node Capabilities mechanism. Few possible options to manage this are
    1. Implement phased capability reliance in the Control Plane. The newer (v1.X) control plane would initially avoid basing decisions based on the new capability signals, and would begin to do so past the allowed version skew (v1. X + version skew).
    2. Backfill capability information on older versions.

Scenario 2 :  kube-scheduler is looking for certain kubelet capability (a new feature added in v1.X) but nodes are running older kubelet versions ( v1.X-2) that do not have the capability.

*   This is a valid use case that Node Capabilities is trying to address. The pod that relies on the feature being enabled should remain pending with a valid status message. 
*   This prevents pods from failing or running with degraded functionality on incompatible nodes, which can happen today if feature-specific node labels and selectors are not properly applied.

> 

Reviewer 2: couldn't we use this feature? if the node.Status has `feature.kubernetes.io/nodeCapabilities`, then the scheduler will prefer those nodes for special features, but consider ones with out that (or any node capabilities). admission plugin won't validate unless feature.kubernetes.io/nodeCapabilities is present

Reviewer 4: @haircommander I don't follow. Are you suggesting the idea to have "soft requirements" for capabilities? I think we've scoped it to only cover hard-requirements for now. If there's a fallback mode where running without the capability is acceptable, then I don't think capabilities as described here is a good fit.

@pravk03 this might a good one to list under the possible future enhancements section.

Author: @haircommander Is your suggestion for Scenario 1 ?. i,e to differenciate between nodes where feature flag is disabled and nodes which do not have a feature specific capability to report. In that case, I think this is a valid suggestion.

}

// Node object remains unchanged in spec, only status is modified.
type Node struct {
    ...
    Status NodeStatus `json:"status,omitempty" `
}

```

**Example:**

```
Capabilities:
   feature.kubernetes.io/nodeCapabilities: "true"
   feature.kubernetes.io/inPlacePodResize: "true"
   feature.kubernetes.io/podLevelResourcesSupport: "true"
   feature.kubernetes.io/swapSupport: "true"
```

**Note:**  

*   Any new capability being introduced is considered a formal API change and must go through the API review process. This governance will be enforced in `kubernetes/kubernetes` codebase by protecting the list of capabilities with the `api-approvers` OWNERS file.
*   We currently have [Node Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6279) and [Node Runtime Features](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/e8d4d542f6a9a16a694bfc8e3b8cd1557eecfc9d/core/v1/types.go#L6251) which publish some runtime features through Node Status. They are too narrowly scoped and currently not used for scheduling pods. We can deprecate those fields and introduce them into NodeCapabilities if required. 

### Kubelet Changes

> Kubelet has the primary responsibility of discovering the capabilities during bootstrap and and updating `node.status.capabilities`.

Author: Done

#### Capability Reporting Semantics

1. If multiple interdependent settings are required to enable a feature, they must be collapsed into a single, logical capability. This simplifies the decision-making process for control plane components like the scheduler, which should not need to understand multiple interdependent settings. 
For example, Swap support on a node depends on several conditions: the feature gate, Kubelet configuration, and underlying kernel support. Instead of reporting these three states individually, Kubelet evaluates them and advertises a single, simple capability: kubernetes.io/feature/swapSupport: "true".

> 2. A capability should only be present if `node.status.capabilities` map if the feature is enabled and functional (`true` or another descriptive string if the capability is not boolean). If a feature is disabled (e.g., a beta feature gate is explicitly set to false) or not supported at all (e.g., on an older Kubelet version or an incompatible OS), the Kubelet must omit the corresponding capability key from the map entirely. This ensures there is consistency between a node that doesn't know about the feature and one that has it disabled which simplifies the logic for control plane components.

Reviewer 9: Btw, it would be easier to propose changes and review commit diffs if long lines were broken into several shorter ones.

> 2. A capability should only be present if `node.status.capabilities` map if the feature is enabled and functional (`true` or another descriptive string if the capability is not boolean). If a feature is disabled (e.g., a beta feature gate is explicitly set to false) or not supported at all (e.g., on an older Kubelet version or an incompatible OS), the Kubelet must omit the corresponding capability key from the map entirely. This ensures there is consistency between a node that doesn't know about the feature and one that has it disabled which simplifies the logic for control plane components.

Author: Sounds good. Reformated this for simplicity.

### Capability Changes on Existing Nodes

Node capabilities are checked by the scheduler during scheduling and then validated again by the Kubelet before a pod's containers can start. If a node's capability is removed (kubelet restart with a feature gate disabled) while a pod is already running, the pod is not automatically removed. Kubelet will re-validate the pod's requirements against the node's current state upon container or node restart, and if a required capability is now missing, it will prevent the container from starting, causing the pod to enter a failed state.

### Integration with Existing Mechanisms

We should ideally have one signal to express scheduling intent, but during transition we might end up having multiple active mechanisms to achieve Pod-to-Node matching in kube-scheduler. 

**Scenario 1**  
If a certain node characteristic or constraint is already managed through existing Kubernetes mechanisms (taints/tolerations/node labels/affinity etc.), and now we have a similar (or overlapping) signal through Node Capabilities. 

> *   The kube-scheduler changes for Node Capabilities do not alter any logic related to the existing mechanisms. In such cases, the scheduling restrictions would be additive in nature i,e we need the node and the pod to satisfy both capability and the existing mechanism to be schedulable on the node. 

Author: Done

    *   Test the validation logic 
        *   The validator admits the request if the node reports the `InPlacePodResizeExclusiveCpus` capability and rejects the request with an appropriate error message if the node does not report the capability.

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`
-->

> ##### Integration tests

Author: Mentioend.

well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: NodeCapabilities
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kubelet, kube-scheduler, kube-apiserver

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

Yes. Introducing new capabilities can prevent pod scheduling or pod request admission when the nodes cannot satisfy the pod requirements. 
*Note:* Enabling the NodeCapabilities feature gate alone doesn't alter default behavior; it only activates the underlying framework. Actual changes to behaviors like pod scheduling or admission happen once nodes start publishing specific capabilities (for instance, Kubelet reporting a feature gate's status as a capability) and control plane components are updated to consume and act on this information.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

> Yes, the feature can be disabled, but a specific rollback order must be followed to prevent scheduling disruptions. The feature must be disabled on control plane components before being Disabled on nodes. When the feature is disabled on a Node, the Kubelet would clear the NodeCapabilities field from the Node's status. Existing pods that are already running are unaffected by this process.

Reviewer 6: I'm not a fan here, because the typical method for downgrades means that you downgrade nodes first.
So thinking more ahead, enabling the feature by default in beta means that potential we won't be able to do a real rollback that way and will require an additional step.

This is getting to the point that I had above in the version skew section - I think it depends how we'll do that.
If we would rely purely on existing of `nodeCapabilities` capability and ignore them (per node) otherwise, we actually can first rollback the nodes.

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

Yes, feature enablement/disablement tests will be added along with alpha implementation.

* Validate that the kube-scheduler plugin filters nodes based on `node.status.capabilities` when the feature is enabled, and ignores the field when the feature is disabled.
* Validate that `node.status.capabilities` is correctly populated when the feature is enabled, and the field is cleared from the `Node` object when the feature is disabled.

> * Validate that the Admission Controller correctly fetches and validates requests against capabilities when the feature is enabled, and does not block requests if the feature is disabled.

Reviewer 6: Those are all good tests, but these are feature tests - not enablement/disablement.

Enablement/disablement is a test that (as stated in the comment in the template above) that switches the feature gate in the middle of the test.

### kube-scheduler Changes

To enable capability-based scheduling, this KEP proposes a new scheduler plugin named NodeCapabilityFilter.

#### Plugin Implementation

`NodeCapabilityFilter` plugin would be enabled if the feature gate is enabled in the kube-scheduler and would implement two extension points in the [scheduling framework](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/). 

1. Prefilter
    *  In this stage, the plugin will inspect the PodSpec to infer the set of required NodeCapability key-value pairs. This computed set of requirements is then stored in the prefilter state.
2. Filter: 
    *   For each node being evaluated, this phase retrieves the pre-computed requirements and checks them against the node's `node.status.capabilities` map.

>     *   The filter plugin would only run on nodes with `feature.kubernetes.io/nodeCapabilities: "true"`. The nodes that have not opted in the capabilities framework (older nodes or feature gate off on the node) will just return Success status.

Reviewer 9: Filtering plugin will be run on such node, but will return Success immediately:
```suggestion
    *   The capabilities filtering logic will run for nodes with `feature.kubernetes.io/nodeCapabilities: "true"`. The nodes that have not opted in the capabilities framework (older nodes or feature gate off on the node) will just return Success status from their Filter.
```

Author: Done.

## Motivation

This proposal includes "Node Capabilities" in Kubernetes to ensure pods are scheduled and can operate reliably on nodes while reducing the operational burden. It provides a standardized way for Kubelet to advertise specific node features and configurations, decreasing reliance on manual Taints or Node Labels.

Node Capabilities aims to prevent pods from being scheduled on incompatible nodes - those missing necessary features because of version skew between control plane and the node or unsupported runtime/kernel configurations ([slack discussion](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C5P3FE08M/p1741867194258139)). Making the scheduler aware of specific node capabilities will enable more reliable pod placement and ensure that incompatibilities are proactively identified as scheduling failures.

### Goals

1. Define a standard mechanism for nodes to expose Kubelet, Runtime, and Kernel configurations that are pertinent to workload scheduling and/or improve API Request validation. 
2. Enhance the kube-scheduler to understand pod requirements and match them against Node capabilities and place pods on compatible nodes. 

> 3. Enable API validation mechanisms to utilize Node Capabilities to verify support for requested operations (e.g., in-place resize, ephemeral containers) before they are processed.

Reviewer 7: does it mean we will expose capabilities for ephemeral containers? Or that we will "enable" possibility to add it? I am not clear here what is the scope of work

> ### Non-Goals

Reviewer 7: should we place Cluster Autoscaler as a Non-Goal? Or it should be a Goal?

### Goals

1. Define a standard mechanism for nodes to expose capabilities that are tied to the Kubernetes feature lifecycle, primarily to manage version skew.
2. Introduce a shared library to encapsulate the logic for inferring a pod's requirements and matching them against node capabilities, ensuring consistency between control plane components that depends on capabilities.
3. Enhance the kube-scheduler to filter nodes based on the pod's requirements.
4. Enable API admission controllers to validate requests for operations against a node's actual feature support.

### Non-Goals

1. Replace Taints/Tolerations or Node Labels/Selectors/Affinity.
2. Serve as a reporting mechanism for permanent static node attributes (like architecture, or specific hardware).
3. To define the exact mapping of a feature to a capability. This KEP proposes the framework that establishes the mechanism; specific mappings will be defined with the features that use them.

> 4. To include full Cluster Autoscaler integration in the initial Alpha stage. The autoscaler makes scaling decisions based on node templates, which lack the capability information. Defining an integration strategy is deferred as a [future enhancement](#cluster-autoscaler-integration). 

Reviewer 7: this will delay adoption. Perhaps it can be solved in alpha

*   Call the shared library to infer the capability requirements.
*   Retrieves the Node object corresponding to `pod.spec.nodeName` and pass it along with the inferred requirements  to the shared library's matching function.
*   If the function returns false, the admission controller rejects the request.

### Capability Lifecycle and Deprecation

To prevent the `node.status.capabilities` map from becoming an ever growing collection of features,  every capability tied to a feature's lifecycle must be automatically removed from the `node.status` object.

The lifecycle stages are as follows:

* Introduction (Alpha/Beta): A new capability that is introduced alongside a new feature. Kubelet begins reporting the capability on nodes where the feature is enabled and active. Control plane components, via the shared library, start using this capability to make decisions.
* Graduation (GA): When the feature graduates to GA, the Kubelet continues to report the capability. This is necessary to manage version skew, allowing the control plane to correctly identify older nodes that do not yet have the GA feature.

> * Automated Deprecation (Post-GA): Kubelet automatically stop reporting the capability after the feature has been GA for a duration that exceeds the cluster's supported version skew. The capability check is bypassed in the shared library based on consumer component (e.g., kube-scheduler) version and feature gate graduation version.

Reviewer 7: This requires clarification. Maybe with the specific versions on how to calculate supported version skews. Does this statement suggests that the capability will be removed only after GA + 3 versions? And after this, the logic is removed from both - control plane and kubelet at the same time?

### Future Considerations 

#### Explicit Capability Request 

For the Alpha implementation, a pod's capability requirements are inferred by the shared library based on its specification. While this centralizes the logic, this implicit model still requires a code change in the shared library for each new capability that is introduced. A suggestion from the SIG Scheduling meeting was to explore a mechanism to keep the scheduler logic generic and avoid having case-specific inference logic.

#### Cluster Autoscaler Integration

The cluster-autoscaler makes scale-up decisions based on `NodeGroup` templates, which are abstract representations of a node. Since node capabilities are reported by a running Kubelet, they are not present on these templates. This creates a prediction gap: the autoscaler cannot know what capabilities a new node will have, making it unable to scale up a node pool from zero nodes to satisfy a capability-specific pending pod.

Considered approaches:

1.  Have the autoscaler inspect a running node in the target node pool and assume all new nodes will be identical. This would work only if a running node exists and fails for the "scale-from-zero" conditions.

> 2.  This problem is fundamentally the same as what [kubernetes/autoscaler#7799](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/7799) is tracking to support DRA use cases. The cluster-autoscaler currently does not consider DRA resources while scaling up and the long term solution would likely involve a new API surface to specify and/or modify autoscaler predictions.

Reviewer 7: is it the same? I thought that DRA is unique as DRA is not a part of a Node Status so it is harder to add those to the templates

Author: It is same in the sense that both NodeCapabilities and DRA are scheduler critical information determined after teh node is created and is not present in the instance template.

Yes, capabilities are present in `node.status` but using it in cluster autoscaler has 2 main drawbacks. 
1. Does not work in scale-from-zero scenario's
2. During upgrade, different nodes within the same group/pool might have different capabilities. This would make it unreliable as the cluster autoscaler samples one node from the group.

2. Introduce a shared library to encapsulate the logic for inferring a pod's requirements and matching them against node capabilities, ensuring consistency between control plane components that depend on capabilities.
3. Enhance the kube-scheduler to filter nodes based on the pod's requirements.
4. Enable API admission controllers to validate requests for operations against a node's actual feature support.
5. Enable Kubelet admission plugin to check if the Pod is compatible with the Node's features  

### Non-Goals

1. Replace Taints/Tolerations or Node Labels/Selectors/Affinity.
2. Serve as a reporting mechanism for permanent static node attributes (like architecture, or specific hardware).
3. To define the exact mapping of a feature to a capability. This KEP proposes the framework that establishes the mechanism; specific mappings will be defined with the features that use them.
4. This framework will not be applied to Kubernetes features that are already implemented. The capability reporting mechanism is designed to support only new features introduced after this framework is in place.

> 5. To include full Cluster Autoscaler integration in the initial Alpha stage. The autoscaler makes scaling decisions based on node templates, which lack the capability information. Defining an integration strategy is deferred as a [future enhancement](#cluster-autoscaler-integration).

Author: Added

*   Developers specify their workload's dependency on these features in the PodSpec either directly (spec.nodeSelector) or other abstractions enabling the scheduler to match them to capable nodes.

**Drawbacks**:

1. Operational Overhead: Cluster administrators have to add the necessary taints/labels to nodes as indirect signals of features and resources, and workloads should use corresponding tolerations/selectors. This needs to be done manually or automations built (webhooks, controllers) to handle standard usage patterns. 
2. Scheduling constraints are encoded indirectly rather than being implicitly understood by kube-scheduler. 
3. Incorrect configurations can lead to scheduling failures or suboptimal placements.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces a new field `Capabilities` to `Node.Status` to expose information which the kube-scheduler and/or the admission controller would use to make more informed decisions. The Kubelet is primarily responsible for discovering, consolidating, and reporting `Capabilities` to the API server.

> **Node Capabilities Requirements:**

Reviewer 7: will kubelet keep reconciling the capabilities, or it will register them on startup and forget? In other words, if some external controller removed or added a new capability, will kubelet keep trying to return it back to the state it believes it is?

Author: Kubelet will build this list of the capabilities once during startup and uses this the subsequent node status updates. If there is an external change to capabilities, the periodic Node Status patch update should reconcile it back to the version that kubelet has (in [tryUpdateNodeStatus](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9da4b7ecfb60ea484f8e6c89c42e63506571bc68/pkg/kubelet/kubelet_node_status.go#L496))

Reviewer 7: Can you add a note about reconciliation to the text please

Author: Done. Added in "Kubelet Changes" section.

    * For an existing beta feature, there currently exists a [workaround](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/23258f104d74c6f27fd4db94940d745d9d463a8f/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L5796) to handle this version skew by looking for alternate signals from the pod spec. However such workarounds may be complex and not always feasible for new features.
    * For a new feature enhancement like [In-Place Pod Resize for Guaranteed QoS pods](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5294), an API request to modify a running pod must be validated. The operation should be rejected if the pod resides on an older node that does not support the feature.

The Node Capabilities framework addresses both issues through a unified mechanism without requiring any intervention (like adding Node Labels, selectors etc.). The scheduler uses the capability information to correctly filter nodes for new pods, while the admission controller validates operations against the capabilities of a pod's current node. This ensures that feature incompatibilities are handled proactively at the control plane.

## Design Details

### API Changes

> Add a `Capabilities` field as type `map[string]string` to the `Node.Status` structure. 

Reviewer 7: will we allow editing the list of capabilities after node was registered? I assume yes since we are saying earlier that kubelet restart is needed to update capabilities, just wanted to confirm

Author: Yes. The node.status.capabilities field can be updated after the node is registered. The capabilitities are determined once during kubelet startup, and we need a kubelet restart for new capabilitied to be discovered and published.

    * This simplifies decision-making for control plane components like the scheduler, which should not need to understand multiple interdependent settings.

3.  Presence of a Capability
    * A capability should only be present in the `node.status.capabilities` map if the feature is enabled and functional.
    * If a feature is disabled or unsupported, the Kubelet must remove the corresponding capability key from the map.
    * This approach ensures consistency and simplifies logic for the control plane, treating nodes that don't know about a feature the same as those that have it disabled.

4.  Validation Rules
    * Keys and values within the `node.status.capabilities` map must adhere to the same validation rules as standard Kubernetes labels.
    * The Kubelet validates each capability and will discard any invalid key-value pair, logging an error.
    * When introducing a new capability that requires a Kubelet change, developers must ensure that the new keys and values meet these validation rules. This would also be enforced by [unit tests](#unit-tests).

**Example:**

```
capabilities:
   lifecycle.kubernetes.io/guaranteed-qos-pod-cpu-resize: "true"
```

### Kubelet Changes

> Kubelet has the primary responsibility of discovering the capabilities during bootstrap and updating `node.status.capabilities`.

Reviewer 4: Actually, maybe we should just fold the discovery logic into the same library that handles the matching. That will keep the producer & consumer code together, which ensures they stay in sync (e.g. easier to share a single name constant, easier to cleanup together, etc.)

> In addition to reporting, Kubelet will also need to validate the pod. Before admitting a pod to be run on the node, the Kubelet's pod admission handlers check if the pod requires any specific capabilities (as inferred from its spec). It will validate these requirements against its own live, in-memory map of supported capabilities. If a required capability is not present, the Kubelet will reject the pod, transition it to a Failed phase, and post an appropriate event to the API server detailing the missing capability. This secondary validation (along with kube-scheduler capability based filtering) is necessary to handle node restart scenarios where a capability that existed during pod scheduling does not exist anymore (feature gate flip with node restart).

Author: The scheduler's capability check would prevent the pod from being scheuled on the old node, so we would not run into this issue ?.

> In addition to reporting, Kubelet will also need to validate the pod. Before admitting a pod to be run on the node, the Kubelet's pod admission handlers check if the pod requires any specific capabilities (as inferred from its spec). It will validate these requirements against its own live, in-memory map of supported capabilities. If a required capability is not present, the Kubelet will reject the pod, transition it to a Failed phase, and post an appropriate event to the API server detailing the missing capability. This secondary validation (along with kube-scheduler capability based filtering) is necessary to handle node restart scenarios where a capability that existed during pod scheduling does not exist anymore (feature gate flip with node restart).

Reviewer 4: > The scheduler's capability check would prevent the pod from being scheuled on the old node, so we would not run into this issue ?

Then what's the point of having the Kubelet perform the capability check at all? I think it's still useful for catching pods that bypass the scheduler, but we should keep the limitation in mind.

> As part of the feature's graduation to GA and subsequent stabilization, the Kubelet must stop reporting the capability. This will occur after the feature has been GA for a duration that exceeds the supported version skew. This ensures that obsolete information is automatically removed from `node.status` object.

Author: I think we might have to continue reporting the capability in the release a feature goes GA if the feature was introduced less than 3 versions (version skew) back.

For instance, a feature introduced as alpha in 1.38 and goes GA in 1.40. With control plane at 1.40, we should still be able to differentiate from a 1.37 node which does not have the feature.

### Shared Capability Matching Library

To avoid code duplication and ensure that all control plane components make decisions based on the same logic, a new shared library will be introduced. This would be added in [component-helpers](https://github.com/kubernetes/component-helpers) staging repository which could be shared by all the components that need capability matching.

**Initialization**

The library will be initialized by each consuming component (e.g., kube-scheduler) and will be provided with two key dependencies:

> * The component's version: This allows the library to handle the automatic deprecation of capability checks over time. For example, if a capability is tied to a feature that graduated to GA in v1.35 and the supported version skew is three releases, a component running v1.39 or newer can automatically bypass the check, as the feature is guaranteed to be present.

Author: The primary reason for adding automatic deprecation was to address the scalability concern of node.status.capabilities becoming an ever-growing list of obsolete capabilities. However, I agree with the concern about poor code hygiene. Could that be enforced through CI or linter checks ?

> * The component's version: This allows the library to handle the automatic deprecation of capability checks over time. For example, if a capability is tied to a feature that graduated to GA in v1.35 and the supported version skew is three releases, a component running v1.39 or newer can automatically bypass the check, as the feature is guaranteed to be present.

Author: I've moved the automatic deprecation part to the "Alternatives Considered" section with the reasons mentioned here and in the comments.

* A handle to the component's `FeatureGate` object: This allows the library to check if a feature is enabled before enforcing a capability match.

**Core Functionality**

The Node Capability Helper will expose functions that logically separate pod inspection and per-node matching.
1. Inferring Requirements: The library will provide a function to analyze the PodSpec and compute a set of its capability requirements for pod creation or update.
2. Matching Requirements: A second function will take the pre-computed requirements and check them against a specific node.

```
// NodeCapabilityHelper creates a new helper instance.
// It requires the version of the consuming component (e.g., kube-scheduler) and a handle to its feature gate map.
func NodeCapabilityHelper(componentVersion *version.Version, featureGates featuregate.FeatureGate) (*NodeCapabilityHelper, error)

// InferPodCreateRequirements inspects a new pod and returns the set of capabilities
// required for its initial scheduling.

> func (h *NodeCapabilityHelper) InferPodCreateRequirements(pod *v1.Pod) (*PodRequirements, error)

Author: We also call this function from kubelet (and potentially from cluster-autoscaler), so i wanted the function name to be more generic.

// InferPodUpdateRequirements inspects the change between an old and new pod spec
// and returns the set of capabilities required to validate the update operation.
func (h *NodeCapabilityHelper) InferPodUpdateRequirements(oldPod, newPod *v1.Pod) (*PodRequirements, error)

// MatchNode checks if a node's advertised capabilities satisfy
// the pre-computed requirements for a pod.

> func (h *NodeCapabilityHelper) MatchNode(reqs *PodRequirements, node *v1.Node) (bool, error)

Author: Ack.

```

This design provides a clear interface for consumers:
* kube-scheduler would call `InferPodCreateRequirements` once during the `PreFilter` stage and then call `MatchNode` for each node during the Filter stage. 
* Admission controller when validating a pod update, would call `InferPodUpdateRequirements()` with the current and the new pod spec to infer the requirement and then call `MatchNode` with the node object from `pod.spec.nodeName`.

### kube-scheduler Changes

To enable capability-based scheduling, this KEP proposes a new scheduler plugin named `NodeCapabilityFilter`.

#### Plugin Implementation

> `NodeCapabilityFilter` plugin would be enabled if the feature gate is enabled in the kube-scheduler and would implement two extension points in the [scheduling framework](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/). 

Author: If a pending pod's spec is updated, the scheduler's logic already handles this by rerunning the pod through the filter ?. 

The Queueing Hints would still be benefitial to handle the scenario where Node is updated with a new capability to reevaluate and schedule a pending pod quickly. I've updated the KEP to include Enqueue Extensions.

1. PreFilter
    *  In this stage, the plugin will pass the pod spec to the shared library to compute a set of its capability requirements. This result will be cached in the scheduler's prefilter state.
2. Filter: 
    * For each node being evaluated, the plugin will retrieve the cached requirements and pass them along with the Node object to a matching function in the shared library.
    * The library itself is responsible for handling all complex logic. The plugin simply acts on the boolean result returned by the library to either filter the node or pass it.

This design ensures that the `NodeCapabilityFilter` plugin remains generic and does not require modification when new capabilities are added. All capability-specific inference and matching logic is encapsulated within the shared library.

#### Performance Considerations

> Introducing this plugin adds a new step to the scheduling cycle, which may have an impact on scheduling throughput. However, this trade-off is acceptable because it prevents the greater inefficiency of scheduling a pod onto a node where it cannot run.

Author: Thanks. Added.

> ### Admission Controller Changes

Author: Yes. PodLevelResourcesResize and IPPR with static policy that i have used in the example walkthrough can be good use-cases.

To enable the validation of API requests against Node Capabilities, this KEP proposes the introduction of a new admission controller plugin `NodeCapabilityValidator` that will be enabled when the `NodeCapabilities` feature gate is active. This admission controller cross-references the objects, i.e., looking  up the `Node` object that a `Pod` is bound to (spec.nodeName) and runs the validation checks.

The admission controller workflow will be as follows:
*   Inspect an incoming pod update request and verifies that the pod is already bound to a node by checking that `pod.spec.nodeName` is set. If not, it takes no action.
*   Call the shared library to infer the capability requirements.
*   Retrieves the Node object corresponding to `pod.spec.nodeName` and pass it along with the inferred requirements  to the shared library's matching function.
*   If the function returns false, the admission controller rejects the request.

> This approach keeps the `NodeCapabilityValidator` plugin generic. It does not need to be updated when new capabilities are introduced, as all feature-specific logic resides in the shared library.

Author: Will remove explicit mention of this. But if we limit to just handling Update requests, we can still have the implementation generic.

To prevent the `node.status.capabilities` map from becoming an ever-growing collection of features, every capability tied to a feature's lifecycle must be automatically removed from the `node.status` object.

The lifecycle stages are as follows:

* Introduction (Alpha/Beta): A new capability that is introduced alongside a new feature. Kubelet begins reporting the capability on nodes where the feature is enabled and active. Control plane components, via the shared library, start using this capability to make decisions.
* Graduation (GA): When the feature graduates to GA, the Kubelet continues to report the capability. This is necessary to manage version skew, allowing the control plane to correctly identify older nodes that do not yet have the GA feature.
* Automated Deprecation (Post-GA): The reporting and checking of a capability are automatically disabled once a feature is old enough to be considered universally present. This logic is executed independently by the Kubelet and the control plane's shared library.
    * Kubelet automatically stops reporting the capability after the feature has been GA for a duration that exceeds the cluster's supported version skew. 

>     * Control Plane: The shared library, using the version and FeatureGate object provided by the consuming component (e.g., kube-scheduler) at initialization, bypasses checks for the same capability. For example, if a feature goes GA in v1.38 and the skew is 3 versions, kube-scheduler running v1.42 or later will bypass that feature's capability check.

Author: I've moved the automatic deprecation part to the "Alternatives Considered" section with the reasons mentioned here and in the comments.

**Phase 2: Rollout**
  * Cluster administrator enables the new feature `InPlacePodVerticalScalingExclusiveCPUs` and `static` CPU Manager Policy on a NodePool.
  * A user requests an in-place CPU resize for a pod on an upgraded node.
  * The `NodeCapabilityValidator` admission controller intercepts the update. It calls the shared library to infer requirements for the change.
  * The library's newly added logic correctly identifies the need for the `lifecycle.kubernetes.io/guaranteed-qos-pod-cpu-resize` capability. The library then matches this requirement against the node's reported capabilities.
  * The request is admitted only if the node that the pod is currently running on supports the feature.

**Phase 3: Post-GA Deprecation**
  * After the feature graduates to GA and the supported version skew window has passed, the feature is considered default. Kubelet will automatically stop advertising the capability and the shared library will bypass the capability check.
  * Code cleanup - the reporting logic is removed from kubelet and the inference logic is removed from the shared library.

### Capability Changes on Existing Nodes

> Node capabilities are checked by the scheduler during scheduling and then validated again by the Kubelet before a pod's containers can start. If a node's capability is removed (kubelet restart with a feature gate disabled) after the pod starts running, the pod is not automatically removed. Kubelet will re-validate the pod's requirements against the node's current state upon container or node restart. If a capability is now missing from the node, the pod's containers won't be started and the pod to enter a failed state.

Author: Thanks. Added this.

2. Matching Requirements: A second function (`MatchNode`) will take the pre-computed requirements and check them against a specific node.

```go

  // CreateInferrer is an interface for inferring capability requirements from a new pod.
  type CreateInferrer interface {
    Infer(ctx context.Context, pod *v1.Pod) *PodRequirement
  }

  // UpdateInferrer is an interface for inferring capability requirements from a pod update.
  type UpdateInferrer interface {
    Infer(ctx context.Context, oldPod, newPod *v1.Pod) *PodRequirement
  }

// InferPodCreateRequirements inspects a new pod and returns the set of capabilities
// required for its initial scheduling.
func (h *NodeCapabilityHelper) InferPodCreateRequirements(ctx context.Context, pod *v1.Pod) (*PodRequirements, error)

// InferPodUpdateRequirements inspects the change between an old and new pod spec
// and returns the set of capabilities required to validate the update operation.

> func (h *NodeCapabilityHelper) InferPodUpdateRequirements(ctx context.Context, oldPod, newPod *v1.Pod) (*PodRequirements, error)

Reviewer 9: Could you elaborate what exactly this function returns?

Author: Added. It returns the list of capability requirements of the pod.

// MatchNode checks if a node's advertised capabilities satisfy
// the pre-computed requirements for a pod.
func (h *NodeCapabilityHelper) MatchNode(ctx context.Context, reqs *PodRequirements, node *v1.Node) (bool, error)
```

This design provides a clear and extensible interface for consumers:

> *   kube-scheduler would call `InferPodCreateRequirements` once during the `PreFilter` stage and then call `MatchNode` for each node during the Filter stage.

Reviewer 9: Mention Enqueue Extension as well

*   Admission controller when validating a pod update, would call `InferPodUpdateRequirements()` with the current and the new pod spec to infer the requirement and then call `MatchNode` with the node object from `pod.spec.nodeName`.

### kube-scheduler Changes

To enable capability-based scheduling, this KEP proposes a new scheduler plugin named `NodeCapability`.

#### Plugin Implementation

`NodeCapability` scheduler plugin would be enabled if the feature gate is enabled in the kube-scheduler and would implement the below extension points in the [scheduling framework](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/).

1. PreFilter
    *   In this stage, the plugin will pass the pod spec to the shared library to compute a set of its capability requirements. This result will be cached in the scheduler's prefilter state.
2. Filter:
    *   For each node being evaluated, the plugin will retrieve the cached requirements and pass them along with the Node object to a matching function in the shared library.

>     *   The library itself is responsible for handling all complex logic. The plugin simply acts on the boolean result returned by the library to either filter the node or pass it.

Reviewer 9: I'm not sure if the boolean is enough. It would be good to tell the user what capabilities are missing in the rejected nodes. At least, `MatchNode` could return some string that the scheduler will send further.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. Updated the function to return a list of unsatisfied capabilities if match fails.

3. Enqueue Extension:
    *   To make the scheduler responsive to cluster changes, the plugin implements queueing hints to optimize re-queueing.

>     *   The scheduler plugin registers for Node events. It will only return a Queue hint for a pending pod if the updated node now satisfies a capability requirement that the previous version of the node did not.

Reviewer 9: Let's specify exact events:
```suggestion
    *   The scheduler plugin registers for Node/Add and Node/Update events. It will only return a Queue hint for a pending pod if the updated node now satisfies a capability requirement that the previous version of the node did not.
```

Reviewer 9: Do we even allow the capabilities to change when the node is running? If not, the Node/Add will be enough here.

Author: Added. Flipping feature gate and restarting kubelet can change the node capabilities.

Reviewer 9: It might be worth mentioning these actions in the KEP

>     *   The scheduler plugin registers for Node events. It will only return a Queue hint for a pending pod if the updated node now satisfies a capability requirement that the previous version of the node did not.

Reviewer 9: What about Pod/Update? Could any update change the pod requirements? If yes, the plugin would need to react on Pod/Update as well, checking, if any requirements were removed.

Author: My understanding is that the existing backoff-and-retry loop will eventually handle any pod update correctly and adding the hint for Pod/Update would result in better responsiveness. Wondering if the extra churn on the scheduler on every Pod/Update is a valid tradeoff.

Reviewer 9: If Pod/Update could make the pod schedulable, we **need** a QueueingHint for that event. If this plugin doesn't register on such event, the pod might not be retried at all *.

* It would be, because we have a safeguarding flushing mechanism, but we want to eventually remove that.

Author: Thanks for sharing the details. Added queue hint for Pod/Update. I believe we can introduce more granular action types to tigger queueing hint function only for relevant node and pod updates.

Reviewer 9: Yes, before beta it would be good to have the more granular actions.

Reviewer 9: I don't see the Pod/Update being mentioned in the KEP. Have you sent that change?

    *   Verify the plugin correctly uses the shared library to match pod requirements against node capabilities, and correctly admits or rejects the request based on the library's result.

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`
-->

##### Integration tests

*   kube-scheduler (for the `NodeCapability` scheduler plugin):

>     *  Integration tests would be added in `test/integration/scheduler/filters`. They will verify the scheduler plugin's PreFilter, Filter, and Enqueue logic by creating `v1.Node` objects, patching their `status.capabilities` field, and scheduling `v1.Pod` objects whose specs imply a requirement for those capabilities. Performance tests will be added in `test/integration/scheduler_perf`.

Reviewer 9: We will also need tests for queueing hints in `test/integration/scheduler/queueing`

>     *  Integration tests would be added in `test/integration/scheduler/filters`. They will verify the scheduler plugin's PreFilter, Filter, and Enqueue logic by creating `v1.Node` objects, patching their `status.capabilities` field, and scheduling `v1.Pod` objects whose specs imply a requirement for those capabilities. Performance tests will be added in `test/integration/scheduler_perf`.

Reviewer 9: This part is duplicated
```suggestion
    *  Integration tests would be added in `test/integration/scheduler/filters`. They will verify the scheduler plugin's PreFilter, Filter, and Enqueue logic by creating `v1.Node` objects, patching their `status.capabilities` field, and scheduling `v1.Pod` objects whose specs imply a requirement for those capabilities.
```

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`
-->

##### Integration tests

*   kube-scheduler (for the `NodeCapability` scheduler plugin):
    *   Integration tests would be added in `test/integration/scheduler/filters`. They will verify the scheduler plugin's PreFilter and Filter by creating `v1.Node` objects, patching their `status.capabilities` field, and scheduling `v1.Pod` objects whose specs imply a requirement for those capabilities.

>     *   Tests for queueing hints would be introduced in `test/integration/scheduler/queueing`. These tests will verify the conditional logic to requeue a pending pod if its capability requirements are satisfied after the node is added or updated.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    *   Tests for queueing hints would be introduced in `test/integration/scheduler/queueing`. These tests will verify the conditional logic to requeue a pending pod if its capability requirements are satisfied after the node is added or updated, or the pod is updated.
```

GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

**Alpha:**
*   The `NodeCapabilities` feature gate is implemented and disabled by default.
*   The Kubelet correctly discovers and reports capabilities to the `node.status.capabilities` map when the feature gate is enabled.
*   A shared library is implemented with the initial logic for capability inference and matching.
*   The API server correctly serves and validates the `capabilities` field when the feature gate is enabled.
*   The `kube-scheduler` and `admission-controller` plugins are introduced and integrated with the shared library.

> *   All unit tests outlined in the Test Plan are implemented and verified.

Reviewer 9: It's worth keeping the coverage from the beginning, at least, in kube-scheduler.
```suggestion
*   All unit and integration tests outlined in the Test Plan are implemented and verified.
```

**Beta:**
*   Revisit the [Explicit Capability Request](#explicit-capability-request) as a beta graduation criteria.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade

Users can enable the Node Capabilities feature gate after upgrading to a Kubernetes version that supports it. For the feature to be fully effective, both the control plane and Kubelets must be upgraded to this version. Existing workload should not be affected after the upgrade. The [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy) section details behavior when only the control plane is upgraded while nodes are still running older Kubelet versions without the feature.

#### Downgrade

Downgrading both kubelet and control plane components to a version without the Node Capabilities feature means subsequent scheduling decisions and API request validations will no longer utilize node capabilities. The [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy) section details behavior when only the kubelet is downgraded to a version lacking the feature.

### Version Skew Strategy

> This section describes the behavior when the `NodeCapabilities` feature gate is enabled on the control plane (e.g., v1.X) but not on an older Kubelet (e.g., v1.X-1).

Reviewer 9: What if the feature is enabled on the kubelet, but not on the kube-scheduler?

previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

No. Capabilities are published as part of the existing NodeStatus updates.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No. This feature will not introduce new top-level API types. Instead, it will modify the existing Node API type by adding a new field node.status.capabilities, to convey capability information.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

Yes. The size of the `Node` object is expected to increase as more capabilities are introduced. The number of capabilities exported will be limited by strategies such as:
1. Capabilities are tied to the feature lifecycle and are removed as a part of the standard post-GA feature cleanup process.
2. Exporting only configurations that are relevant to the control plane.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

> Yes, a marginal increase is possible for pod scheduling operations. This potential increase is because kube-scheduler will need to extract capability requirements specified in the Pod Spec and match them against the capability information reported on Node objects. However, this additional processing overhead is expected to be comparable to that of existing scheduling predicates like taint/toleration or Node Label/Selector matching.

Reviewer 9: We don't yet know whether this will be marginal.
```suggestion
Yes, an increase is possible for pod scheduling operations. This potential increase is because kube-scheduler will need to extract capability requirements specified in the Pod Spec and match them against the capability information reported on Node objects. However, this additional processing overhead is expected to be comparable to that of existing scheduling predicates like taint/toleration or Node Label/Selector matching.
```

    *   For an existing beta feature, there currently exists a [workaround](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/23258f104d74c6f27fd4db94940d745d9d463a8f/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L5796) to handle this version skew by looking for alternate signals from the pod spec. However such workarounds may be complex and not always feasible for new features.
    *   For a new feature enhancement like [In-Place Pod Resize for Guaranteed QoS pods](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5294), an API request to modify a running pod must be validated. The operation should be rejected if the pod resides on an older node that does not support the feature.

The Node Capabilities framework addresses both issues through a unified mechanism without requiring any intervention (like adding Node Labels, selectors etc.). The scheduler uses the capability information to correctly filter nodes for new pods, while the admission controller validates operations against the capabilities of a pod's current node. This ensures that feature incompatibilities are handled proactively at the control plane.

## Design Details

### API Changes

> Add a `Capabilities` field as type `map[string]string` to the `Node.Status` structure.

Author: Renamed based on the suggestion. PTAL.

```
type NodeStatus struct {
    // ... existing fields

>     // Capabilities provides a structured way to report various capabilities of the node. Keys are DNS-style and values are strings.

Author: Added along with the other validation rules.

As part of the feature's graduation to GA and eventual removal of the feature gate, the Kubelet must stop reporting the capability. This ensures that obsolete information is removed from the `node.status` object as part of the standard feature cleanup process.

### Shared Capability Matching Library

To avoid code duplication and ensure that all components make decisions based on the same logic, a new shared library will be introduced in the `k8s.io/component-helpers/nodecapabilities` staging repository. This library encapsulates all the logic for inferring and matching pod capability requirements.

> **Capability Registration**

Reviewer 4: (already discussed offline out-of-band, adding notes here)

@liggitt pointed out that the library should be consumable by controllers that interact with multiple Kubernetes clusters that aren't necessarily the same version, which means that the library should be able to support multiple kubernetes versions.

I think the best way to handle this is to associate a Min & Max version with each capability (provided in registration), and include target version as an input when inferring the requirements.

Author: Updated. `MinVersion` and `MaxVersion` are passed during registration and `targetVersion` is used while checking pod's feature requirements.

Reviewer 4: Following up on this, I'm pretty sure we can drop the MinVersion, and in fact that might be desireable. The _library_ should have a notion of min & max version, so if you ask it to derive the required features outside that window it can throw an error, but for a given pod, I think it's better to state that it requires an unsupported feature rather than silently dropping it.

// InferPodUpdateRequirements inspects the change between an old and new pod spec
// and returns a list of feature requirements required by the pod update operation
// for a specific target Kubernetes version.
// If the pod requires a feature where `targetVersion < MinVersion`, the function returns an `IncompatibleFeatureError`.
// If the pod requires a feature where `targetVersion > MaxVersion`, the feature is not added to the list as it's assumed to be universally available in the cluster.
func (h *NodeCompatibleFeatureHelper) InferPodUpdateRequirements(ctx context.Context, oldPod, newPod *v1.Pod, targetVersion string) ([]string, error)

// MatchResult encapsulates the result of a compatible feature match check.
type MatchResult struct {
	// IsMatch is true if the node satisfies all feature requirements.
	IsMatch bool
	// UnsatisfiedFeatureRequirements lists the specific compatible features that were not met.
	// This field is only populated if IsMatch is false.
	UnsatisfiedFeatureRequirements []string
}

// MatchNode checks if the current node's compatible features satisfy the pre-computed requirements for a pod.
// It returns a MatchResult with the outcome of the match.

> func (h *NodeCompatibleFeatureHelper) MatchNode(ctx context.Context, reqs []string, node *v1.Node) (*MatchResult, error)

Reviewer 4: Yeah, this is just an implementation detail. The library that handles the matching should build its own internal representation. Maybe a `map[string]string`, although I think we should consider mapping it to a bit-map (so we can just check approximately `requiredFeaturesBitMap & declaredFeaturesBitMap != 0`)
